Theres a guy from my childhood, thinks like Jeremy Howard from fastai, who suggested a cute thing, an approach.
"[23:24, 19/08/2026] Shikar Drik: Core idea
Build an AI agent that has been trained only on pre-calculus mathematics and then expose it to problems that require calculus-level reasoning.
The goal is not to teach it calculus or make it retrieve known calculus formulas.
Instead, ask:

Can the model autonomously discover a new mathematical abstraction equivalent to a calculus concept because its existing pre-calculus concepts are insufficient?

The envisioned loop
Pre-calculus knowledge
        ↓
Unseen / increasingly difficult problems
        ↓
Existing concepts become insufficient
        ↓
Agent searches for a new representation / procedure
        ↓
Candidate abstraction
        ↓
Formalize + verify in Lean
        ↓
Test on new problems
        ↓
Successful abstraction retained
        ↓
Further problems
Example
Give it:
arithmetic
algebra
functions
geometry
trigonometry
sequences
but no derivatives or integrals.
Then give it problems involving instantaneous change.
If it independently develops an operation/function that behaves like
\[
\lim_{h\to0}\frac{f(x+h)-f(x)}{h},
\]
and that abstraction generalizes to new problems, we have evidence that it has discovered a calculus-level abstraction, rather than memorized calculus.
What makes the idea distinctive
It combines three research directions:
Grokking:
Can neural networks develop previously unseen internal algorithms/representations?
Mathematical discovery:
Can AI discover mathematical structures rather than merely solve known problems?
Lean-based agentic reasoning:
Can an agent iteratively propose, test, formalize, and verify mathematical ideas?
The ultimate research question is therefore:

Can AI discover mathematics that lies beyond the mathematical concepts it was explicitly trained on?

The pre-calculus → calculus experiment is the first narrow, testable case of that much larger question.
[23:28, 19/08/2026] Shikar Drik: Yes. They are related, but your idea goes further.
Think of it like this:
Current Lean-based AI
AI: "I need to prove this theorem. What proof should I try?"
→ proposes proof
→ Lean checks it
→ says correct/incorrect
→ AI tries again
So the AI is mainly discovering proofs.
Your idea
You want:
AI: "I don't have calculus. I only know pre-calculus. I have these problems. What new mathematical idea do I need?"
→ invents a new concept
→ tests it
→ develops rules around it
→ uses it to solve harder problems
→ Lean verifies everything
So you're trying to make AI discover concepts/theories, not merely proofs.
The hierarchy
1. Solve a problem
→ "Prove this theorem."
2. Discover a theorem
→ "Find something true and prove it."
3. Discover a concept
→ "Invent a new mathematical object that makes problems easier."
4. Discover a theory ← your ultimate goal
→ "Starting from pre-breakthrough knowledge, invent something equivalent to calculus."
Why Lean could be useful
Lean can act as your truth checker.
Instead of saying:

"The AI seems to have invented calculus."

you can demonstrate:

"The AI invented this new framework, and Lean formally verified its definitions, theorems, and consequences."

That makes the experiment much more rigorous.
So your project could potentially be:

Build an AI system capable of autonomously inventing mathematical abstractions, and use historical breakthroughs such as calculus as controlled experiments to test it.

That's more ambitious than a normal Lean theorem-proving agent."
ok so what i did was paste a bunch of slop my guy generated by chatting with his gpt.

so where do you come in here? simple, paint the picture, what are we looking at?> hoping to achieve? what might be the milestones, drawbacks, nail in the coffins, inspirations? dude just be my consiglier

Alright. Consigliere hat on. Here's my honest read.

What you're actually holding
The idea is real, and the framing is wrong in a specific way that will get it killed by the first serious reader.

The real target — concept formation, not proof search — is genuinely open territory. FunSearch and AlphaEvolve showed LLM-in-a-loop can find new mathematical objects (a better cap set construction, better bounds). Nobody has convincingly shown a system inventing a new reusable abstraction and then compounding on it. Your friend has correctly identified the gap in the ladder. Rungs 1 and 2 are occupied. Rung 3 is empty.

The framing that kills it: "train a model only on pre-calculus." You can't. Any model with enough reasoning capability to invent anything has read every calculus textbook on the internet. Any model you train from scratch on a clean pre-calculus corpus is small and dumb enough that it will invent nothing. Capability and cleanliness are anti-correlated, and this is the whole problem. A reviewer says this in sentence two and the project is over.

So the project's real question isn't "can it discover calculus." It's "can you construct a setting where discovery is distinguishable from recall." Everything else is downstream of solving that.

The reframe I'd push
Stop trying to prove it invented calculus. Instead: measure abstraction discovery as compression + transfer.

Operational definition: an abstraction is a named definition plus proved lemmas that measurably reduce the cost of solving held-out problems — shorter proofs, fewer search steps, higher solve rate on a set the abstraction wasn't selected against. That's a number. It's falsifiable. It doesn't require you to adjudicate philosophical questions about "did it really understand."

This is exactly DreamCoder's frame (library learning, MDL), ported to Lean. That's your intellectual lineage, not grokking.

Side note — grokking is a red herring in that doc. Grokking is a network internalizing a fixed algorithm after memorizing. It's not invention. Citing it will make you look like you skimmed.

The scoped v1 that actually works
Here's the version I'd bet on, and I think it's genuinely elegant:

Drop limits entirely. Work in ℚ[x].

The derivative on polynomials is purely algebraic — no topology, no completeness, no ε-δ. It's the unique ℚ-linear map D with D(fg) = fD(g) + gD(f) and D(x) = 1. Historically this is pre-Newton: Hudde and Descartes were computing tangents to polynomial curves in the 1650s via the double-root condition — the tangent line at a point is the line whose difference with the curve has a repeated root there. Fully algebraic. Fully Lean-formalizable over a commutative ring. No mathlib analysis imports at all.

So your fragment is: ordered field axioms, polynomial ring, root/factor theorem, resultants maybe. Your problems are: find tangent lines, find local extrema, find where curves touch. Solvable by brute algebra, painfully. The good solution is to invent D.

Why this is the right v1:

The fragment is expressive enough that the target is definable, but doesn't contain the recipe. This is the hardest constraint to get right and most versions of this idea fail it silently. If you include ℝ-completeness so limits are definable, you've imported the entire scaffolding of analysis and the "discovery" is a two-line lookup. If you exclude it, the limit-derivative is not definable and the experiment is impossible, not hard. The polynomial route dodges the whole dilemma.
There's a uniqueness theorem — any derivation on ℚ[x] is pinned down by its value on x. So "did it find the right object" has a crisp answer, up to iso. You like structural invariants; this is one.
Lean-checkable with ring theory only. Your sandbox is small.
Milestones
M0 — Pre-register. Before writing code, write down: the exact Lean fragment (import list), the problem set, the success metric, and what result would falsify you. Publish the hash. This single move is what separates you from the ten other people who've pitched this.

M1 — The sandbox. Lean 4 project with a hard import whitelist, a harness that typechecks candidate definitions and measures proof length / tactic steps. ~50–80 tangent/extremum problems with machine-checkable success. Assume this eats 40% of your total effort. It always does.

M2 — Contamination ceiling (negative control). Frontier model, no discovery loop, just "solve these in the fragment." It'll do fine, because it knows. That number is your ceiling and your embarrassment. Report it.

M3 — The obfuscation ablation. This is your paper. Re-encode the entire domain into an alien algebraic structure — rename everything, change the notation, make it a made-up ring with unfamiliar operation symbols. Rerun. If performance collapses, contamination was doing all the work and you've learned something real. If it survives, you have actual signal about search rather than retrieval. Either outcome is publishable; that's what makes it a good experiment.

M4 — The loop. LLM proposes definitions → Lean typechecks → score by compression on a training split → population of candidate abstractions, keep/mutate/discard. FunSearch-shaped, not RL-shaped. Do not try to RL this; the reward is sparse, delayed, and the action space is unbounded generation. You'll burn a semester on reward hacking.

M5 — Transfer. Held-out problems the abstraction was never scored against. This is the only number that matters.

Nails in the coffin
Things that would genuinely end it, in order of likelihood:

Lean engineering eats everything. Most likely failure mode by a wide margin. Four students, no Lean veteran, six months — you ship a sandbox and no science. Mitigation: budget M1 explicitly, and have a Python-only fallback verifier (sympy-based, weaker but working) so the loop can run while Lean matures.
Valid-but-useless generation. Lean checks soundness, never utility. Without the compression metric the agent produces infinite well-typed garbage. This is precisely how Lenat's AM died — and you will be asked about AM. Read Ritchie & Hanna's critique of it before anyone asks you.
Representation smuggling. If your problem statements say "as h gets small," you handed it the answer. This killed BACON's credibility — Langley's system "rediscovered" Kepler's laws, but only because it was fed exactly the right variables. Your problem phrasing needs adversarial review by someone trying to break it.
The distinguishability problem is unsolvable in your setting. If M3 shows obfuscation doesn't dent performance and you can't show any search behavior, you can't claim discovery. Honest outcome: publish it as a negative result about measurement. Still worth doing.
Inspirations — actually read these
DreamCoder (Ellis et al.) for library learning as the core mechanism. FunSearch and AlphaEvolve for the loop architecture. Lenat's AM/EURISKO and Ritchie & Hanna's takedown for the failure mode. Langley's BACON for the smuggling problem. Colton's HR for automated theory formation. Davies et al. (Nature 2021, knot theory) for what human-AI mathematical collaboration actually looks like in practice. And AlphaGeometry for how synthetic problem generation in a constrained domain is done properly.

Bottom line
The moonshot framing gets you attention and gets you rejected. The version that survives is: a benchmark and environment for measuring abstraction discovery under formal verification, with algebraic differentiation as the first instance. That's a workshop paper at MATH-AI or AITP, it's reusable by other people, and it's the kind of thing where the negative result is still a contribution.

Your friend's instinct about rung 3 is good. His plan for getting there isn't. The gap between those two is where your actual project lives.

Want me to sketch the Lean fragment concretely — the import whitelist and a couple of the seed problems — so you can see whether M1 is a two-week job or a two-month one?

dude you must be taking me for Terrence Tao. My literal primary goal is entailment-based extension from precalc to calc(even yk this is just a gimmick, we'll reach your peak level that you aspire us to be but not now)

Fair. Descoping.

One thing to steal before we shrink, because it makes the small version legible:

What you're building has an exact name in logic. Adding a definition to a theory is a conservative definitional extension — it proves nothing new in the old language. But Gödel's speedup theorem says such an extension can shorten proofs super-exponentially. So:

A concept is a definition that adds no truths and enormous reach.

That's your whole project in one line, and it hands you your metric for free: proof length on problems the base theory could already solve, just miserably. You're not claiming discovery of new mathematics. You're claiming discovery of compression. Much easier to defend, and it's what "entailment-based extension" actually means when you make it precise.

The build
1. Base theory — one Lean file, Precalc.lean. Polynomials over ℚ, root/factor theorem, ordered field lemmas. Hard rule: no Mathlib.Analysis.*. Enforce with a grep in CI, not vibes.

2. Problem set — 30 tangent-line problems. "Find the line through (a, f(a)) meeting f only there, to multiplicity 2." Solvable in the base by the double-root trick: expand f(x) − (mx+c), demand (x−a)² divides it, grind. Painful and mechanical. That pain is the whole experiment.

3. Agent turn — model outputs a Lean block: one def, plus 2–3 lemma statements about it. Nothing else. Lean either accepts or doesn't. No parsing, no cleverness, exit code is your judge.

4. Score — solve the 30 problems with base only, then with base + accepted definition. Compare tactic count / proof term size. Split 20 train / 10 held-out.

That's it. Python subprocess loop, a few hundred lines. Two to three weeks if Lean setup doesn't eat you, which it will, so budget four.

Success at this scale
It emits something D-shaped, Lean accepts the lemmas (linearity, product rule), and the 10 held-out proofs get materially shorter. You have a working demo of concept-as-compression. That's a real artifact, and it's honest as long as you say "the model has read calculus; this shows the loop functions, not that it discovered anything."

The one guardrail worth keeping
Cheap version of the obfuscation test — literally rename. Poly → Glyph, D → flatten, drop all calculus vocabulary from your prompt. One afternoon. If it still works, you can say the loop isn't purely keyword-triggered. If it collapses, you learned that in a day instead of at the demo.

Skip everything else I said last time. Population search, ablations, benchmark framing — that's v2, and v2 only exists if v1 runs.

Want the actual Precalc.lean skeleton and three seed problems? That's the fastest way to find out if M1 is two weeks or two months.

Quote, 1 line
That's your whole project in one line, and it hands you your metric for free: proof length on problems the base theory could already solve, just miserably. You're not claiming discovery of new mathematics. You're claiming discovery of compr
umm...you sure about that? Im gonna train it on everything before calc(yeah  yeah one dimensional), then im gonna throw it a calculus problem(dont worry about linguistic issues, I'll re-phrase the calc prb each time so that my precalc-brained agent can at least understandddd, though i dont guarantee solvability by that agent)
what happens then? you cant claim what youre claiming here then, right?.

You're right. I over-claimed. If the problem isn't provable in the base theory, "compression" is the wrong word and the conservativity story doesn't apply. Let me redo it properly, because the fork matters more than the correction.

Three tiers, by what the base theory can do with the problem:

A — statable and provable. Tangent lines to polynomials. The concept is a definition; extension is conservative; Lean stays a truth oracle; metric is proof length. This is what I described, and yes, it's the weak version.

B — statable but not provable. The agent has to add an axiom, not a definition. And here's the structural problem: axiom foo : ... is accepted by Lean unconditionally. Lean checks that proofs follow from axioms. It does not check that axioms are true, and it will not notice if the agent introduces an inconsistent one and then "solves" everything. The moment your agent is allowed to postulate rather than construct, your verifier stops verifying. That's the nail for the maximal version, and it's not fixable by trying harder — it's what formal systems are.

C — not even statable. Which is where your rephrasing step lives, and rephrasing is exactly where the answer gets smuggled. If you have to say "as the interval shrinks" to make it legible, you wrote the derivative into the prompt.

So: your instinct is correct that Tier A is a gimmick, but Tier B costs you your verifier and Tier C costs you your control.

The gap between them is where your project should sit, and your friend's own list points at it. He wrote sequences.

Put ℝ with completeness, sequences, and limits of sequences in the base theory. Infinite geometric series is standard pre-calc and it's already a limit — so this is legitimately pre-calculus, not smuggling. But no derivative, no integral, no difference quotient, no continuity.

What that buys you:

The derivative is definable. So the extension is conservative, so Lean is still a truth oracle, so your rigor claim survives.
But it is nowhere near a lookup. Constructing D from sequence limits is a real act of invention — the agent has to notice that the object it needs is a limit of a ratio, over a parameter it has to introduce itself.
Problems become unsolvable in practice without it, while staying statable — so you don't need Tier C rephrasing at all. Instantaneous velocity on a non-polynomial, area under a curve, extrema of transcendentals. In-principle reachable, in-practice hopeless.
And that in-principle/in-practice gap isn't a cop-out, it's the actual history. Archimedes computed the area of a parabolic segment without calculus. It was possible. It took a genius, a scroll, and an argument nobody could generalize. Calculus turned it into homework. Newton didn't add truths to mathematics — he added reach.

So your metric stops being proof length and becomes solve rate on problems the base agent scores zero on, which is the crisp signal you actually wanted. You just get it without giving up Lean.

Requirement to enforce, and it's the whole discipline: the agent may def, never axiom. Everything it introduces must be constructed from what's already there. That single rule is what keeps Tier B's ambition and Tier A's rigor in the same experiment.

Does that land, or do you actually want the agent to be able to postulate?

Quote, 5 lines
A — statable and provable. Tangent lines to polynomials. The concept is a definition; extension is conservative; Lean stays a truth oracle; metric is proof length. This is what I described, and yes, it's the weak version. B — statable but n
give examples for all three

Fixed base for comparison: ordered field, polynomials, functions, trig, sequences — no limit predicate, no continuity, no derivative, no integral. Tier depends on the pair (problem, base), which turns out to be the useful part; I'll come back to it.

Tier A — statable and provable
Tangent to a parabola. "Find m, c such that y = mx + c meets y = x² at x = a with multiplicity 2." States as ∃ q, x² - (m*x + c) = (x - a)^2 * q. Pure polynomial identity. Provable by expanding and matching coefficients: m = 2a, c = −a². Grindy but elementary. D turns it into one lemma application.

Extremum of a cubic. "Show f(x) = x³ − 3x has f(x) ≥ f(1) for all x ≥ 0." States with ∀ and ≤. Provable: factor f(x) − f(1) = (x−1)²(x+2), both factors ≥ 0 on the domain. The factoring is a rabbit out of a hat; D makes it a procedure.

Σk³. "Prove Σ_{k=1}^n k³ = n²(n+1)²/4." Provable by induction — if you're handed the closed form. Finding it is the hard part, and the abstraction that finds it is finite differences: Δf(n) = f(n+1) − f(n), plus telescoping as a discrete fundamental theorem. Wholly algebraic, no limits, and it compresses an entire problem class.

Honestly, finite differences is a better Tier A target than tangent lines. It's a small theory rather than a single definition — operator, inverse, telescoping theorem, falling factorials as the natural basis — so a hit there is a hit on "discovered a framework," not just "guessed an object."

Tier B — statable, not provable
√2 exists. ∃ x : F, x^2 = 2. Perfectly statable in the language of ordered fields. False in ℚ, so unprovable from those axioms. The only move from inside is to postulate.

Intermediate value property. "If f(a) < 0 < f(b) then ∃ c ∈ (a,b), f(c) = 0." Statable for polynomials with nothing but order and arithmetic. Not provable — ℚ is a countermodel (x² − 2 on [0,2]). You need real-closedness, which is an axiom, not a theorem, at this level.

Archimedean property. ∀ x, ∃ n : ℕ, (n : F) > x. Statable. Unprovable — non-Archimedean ordered fields exist and satisfy every base axiom.

And here's the failure, concretely. The agent hits a rate-of-change problem, reasons like Leibniz, and writes:

lean
axiom ε : ℝ
axiom ε_pos : ε > 0
axiom ε_tiny : ∀ n : ℕ, ε < 1 / (n + 1)
An infinitesimal. Historically authentic — this is the fluxion move, the thing Berkeley called ghosts of departed quantities. If your base contains the Archimedean property, these axioms are inconsistent. Lean accepts all three without complaint, because axioms aren't checked, they're assumed. Then the agent proves False, and from False it proves every remaining problem in your set. Your dashboard shows 100%. Your verifier signed off on all of it.

That's Tier B's whole problem in eleven lines.

Tier C — not statable
"Instantaneous velocity at t = 2." There is no such term in the base. Watch the rephrasing gradient:

"Average velocity over [2, 2+h] as h shrinks to 0" — you wrote the difference quotient into the prompt. Total smuggle.
"The limit of average velocities over shrinking intervals" — same, one layer of paint.
"Average velocity over [2, 2.001]" — smuggles nothing, but it's a different problem with a different answer, and the base solves it trivially.
There's no fourth option. That's the trap: every faithful rephrasing is contaminated and every clean rephrasing is a different question.

"Area under y = 1/x from 1 to 2." Base has polygon area, maybe circle area as a given constant. "Region bounded by a curve" isn't definable. Rephrase as sums of rectangles and you've handed over Riemann.

"Is f continuous at 0?" No limit predicate, no ε-δ, no statement. Same for arc length, curvature, convergence of a series.

The test for smuggling: can you mechanically translate your rephrased statement into the target definition? If a competent reader can read off lim (f(a+h) - f(a))/h from your prompt, you didn't rephrase — you defined.

The design dial
Notice instantaneous velocity was Tier C above. Add sequences with a limit predicate to the base and the same problem becomes Tier A — statable, provable in principle, and hopeless in practice without D.

That's the whole knob. The tier isn't a property of the problem, it's a property of the pair. So designing this experiment is one job: choose the base that puts your interesting problems in Tier A while leaving the concept genuinely hard to construct. Too thin a base and everything falls to C. Too thick and you've included the answer. ℝ-with-sequence-limits is my bet for where that window sits — and it's defensible as pre-calculus, since infinite geometric series is standard Grade 11 material and already a limit.

Want me to write the base-theory import list for that version, so you can see whether the "hard in practice" claim actually holds up when you try to solve one by hand?

ok tier a is definitely what we had in plan, but if we're thinking about funsearch or stuff like concept formulation, i cant really kick out tier b cz in the end, generalisation+bias is what got us calculus from precalc(maybe, idk)(btw im still blurry about safe axiom invention might be cz its been empirically evident that gpt invents illegal moves in chess to win), but tier c is too umm...too much for us rn lol(we're fucking retards)

Your instinct on Tier B is right and the historical read is basically correct — calculus was not a conservative extension of pre-calculus. Newton and Leibniz added objects nobody could justify, Berkeley shredded them in 1734, and the rigorous foundation showed up ~150 years later with Cauchy and Weierstrass. So if you rule out unsound-but-productive leaps, you rule out the actual event you're trying to replicate.

But the chess thing is exactly the right worry, so let's kill it properly.

Why GPT invents illegal chess moves: the move generator and the legality checker are the same system. You've fixed that — Lean is a separate referee. Except Lean only checks legality of inference, not legality of premises. axiom is the agent editing the rulebook mid-game, and Lean permits it silently. So you haven't actually escaped the chess problem yet; you've moved it.

The fix: make it provide a model
The classical criterion for a safe axiom is it has a model. And there's a Lean-native way to force this:

Don't let the agent write axiom. Make it write a class plus an instance.

lean
class HasSqrt2 (F : Type*) extends LinearOrderedField F where
  s : F
  s_sq : s * s = 2

-- agent must supply:
instance : HasSqrt2 (ℚ × ℚ) := ...   -- ℚ[√2], multiplication twisted
The instance is the consistency proof. Relative consistency, machine-checked, no trust required. And notice what this does structurally: Tier B done safely collapses back into Tier A over a bigger base. You keep the ambition and lose nothing.

The infinitesimal case is the sharpest version of this. Your agent postulates ε, and it's inconsistent with an Archimedean base — genuinely illegal. But Robinson built the hyperreals in 1960 via an ultrafilter construction, and the price was dropping the Archimedean property in the extension. So the instance requirement doesn't just filter bad axioms; it forces the agent to discover what must be given up. That's a much more interesting research output than "proposed axiom, accepted."

Two cheap enforcement details worth having on day one:

#print axioms myTheorem tells you exactly which axioms a proof depends on. CI rule: every theorem must depend on nothing but Lean's three built-ins. Greppable, one line, catches all silent postulation.
A canary suite — a handful of known-false statements ((2:ℚ) < 1, (0:ℚ) = 1). Try to prove them each iteration. If any goes through, the theory exploded. Catches inconsistency before it inflates your solve rate to 100%.
Three lanes, not two tiers
Green — def only, provably conservative. Auto-accept.
Amber — new axioms with an instance. Accept, log which base property got sacrificed.
Red — new axioms, no model. Quarantine, don't discard.
The red lane is where your interesting results live, and this is the part I'd push hardest on. Leibniz sat in red for two centuries. What licensed his calculus wasn't proof, it was empirical adequacy — it got the right answers to problems whose answers were independently known.

So give yourself a second referee. Problems with machine-checkable ground truth. If a red-lane abstraction produces correct answers on 40 held-out problems, that's not a failure, that's Newton's own justification, and it's a legitimately publishable observation: the agent reproduced a historically unsound but empirically adequate abstraction. Which is a far better result than a clean Tier A compression demo.

Two referees, then. Lean for soundness, answer-checking for adequacy. Green and amber pass the first. Red only has to pass the second.

Ordering, since FunSearch-style loops die on expensive scoring
Model construction is slow, so filter cheap-first: canary suite → random counterexample testing (mathlib's slim_check/Plausible will hunt for a falsifying instance in seconds) → then attempt the instance. Most bad proposals die in the first two, free.

And one thing you should not do: don't have the agent invent axioms and prove theorems in the same generation call. Separate them. Proposal and exploitation want different prompts and different temperatures, and mixing them is how you get an agent that quietly assumes the thing it's proving.

On "we're fucking retards" — the reason this conversation has been productive is that you've caught two real errors in my framing in three messages. That's the actual skill. The Lean is just labor.

The next thing that would move you forward isn't more design, it's finding out whether #print axioms plus a class-instance workflow is annoying or pleasant in practice. That's a one-evening spike: write the HasSqrt2 class above, build the ℚ×ℚ instance by hand, see how much it hurts. If that's fine, your amber lane is real. If it's miserable, you ship green-only for v1 and you'll know by Wednesday.

